professor Richard wolf says the economy
is going to get a lot worse he's
predicting something like or worse than
the Great Depression
check it out leave your comments ding
the bells share it with your friends and
subscribe to our Channel
welcome back Tom Hartman here with you
on the phone with us is Professor
Richard wolf The Economist's co-founder
of democracy at work info author of
numerous books his most recent
understanding socialism his websites
democracy at work dot info and Rd wolf
with two FS dot-com you can tweet him at
prof wolf PR o f as in professor wolf
WOL FFF professor wolf welcome back
thank you Tom glad to be here I am very
curious to hear your thoughts on where
we're at I think last week when we
talked or maybe it was even the week
before that I had I had said to a
congressman on this program after the
first stimulus was passed I said it's
gonna take at least 10 trillion to get
us out of this hole or to get us through
the year you know we're gonna have to
basically make up for an economy that's
not running we have now 10 million
people out of work you know our peoples
jobs gonna be there when they go back
what's what's America gonna look like
economically a year from now and and
banks are warning that Trump's small
business loan program is headed for a
total disaster your thoughts on these
things sir well I think that the the
truth of it is nobody knows and I'm not
going to get myself into difficulty with
you and your listeners by by pretending
that I could answer that question there
are simply too many variables number one
and too much is happening too quickly
for us to understand I mean when I saw
the numbers this week of the increase in
people applying for unemployment we're
we're losing you know I don't know a
million people a day or or someone has
trinomial number of people basically
losing their jobs losing their incomes
you have to shake your head in disbelief
in a few short weeks we have gone from
an economy that the president of our
country referred to as the greatest in
the world to an economy that looks to us
now and I mean this you
to be entering into a depression the
likes of which we've only seen once
before namely in the 1930s a literal
complete breakdown in which millions of
people have no job in which vast
portions of our business community have
effectively stopped functioning and in
which the next steps are so scary and so
unknown that everyone is in a limbo of
sorts with the only extra weird part of
it being that were isolated in our
little of living situations being told
that it's a life threatening to go
outside I mean under such circumstances
making predictions is very difficult I
can tell you that the behavior of the
Federal Reserve the money that they've
been pumping in records amounts the
interest rates that had been low for 15
years now even lower had totally failed
I mean let's be real clear two weeks ago
the Federal Reserve dropped interest
rates by a half a point
everybody said Wow it had no positive
effect that anyone can discern a week
later they cut the interest rate that
time by a full percent everyone said Wow
twice and it was again a total failure
the only thing you can say and even that
without certainty is that it would have
been even worse perhaps if they hadn't
done it but that's that's not much
comfort and now we see this two trillion
dollar fiscal program of stimulus and
all I can do as an economist and a
historian is shake my head and repeat
the old phrase way too little way too
late let's remember the if in metaphor
if the parallel is the Great Depression
which it is we can see that with the
unemployment numbers already
then let's compare giving one thousand
two hundred dollars to every taxpayer
maybe five hundred to their kids and
maybe an extra few hundred to the
unemployment check versus what was done
in an eye
1830s Roosevelt begins by creating the
Social Security system which we had
never had he declares at a time when the
government is much more in trouble
revenue wise than it is today and we
have much more unemployment even than we
have today he declares the Social
Security system is going to give every
American 65 years of age or older a
check every month
for the rest of their lives rather than
a one-time check for $1,200 I mean
you're talking an elephant versus a flea
but that's not all you know a few months
later he declares the unemployment
compensation system everybody who's out
of work and in those days it was tens of
millions it's now going to get a check
from the federal government every week
for a year or longer dwarfing by many
times a multiple of many times $1,200
per voter and finally the public
employment program from 1934 to 41 15
million Americans were given a federal
job an important job doing all kinds of
important things so that unemployed
people would have a job would have
income would have the self-esteem that
goes with it would be able to make their
mortgage payments to hold on to their
home none of that is being done now
people are being told go do nothing no
government program for them to be useful
to one another no planning for anything
I mean the level of failure of this
system to either prepare for or cope
with this kind of a disaster it would
make you think gee this is something new
nobody could prepare for it but that's
the opposite of the truth we had a
pandemic like this in 1918 worse than
this one at least it looks that way we
know exactly how it works and what needs
to be done a few years ago we had SARS
we had MERS we had Ebola I mean we know
what this is we know that the spread of
the disease is there is no excuse for
the level of breakdown and what your
seeing is the cascade of consequences
when the system has been focused on
private profit maximization instead of
meeting the needs of a society which in
any rational way would include preparing
for something as well-known as viral
pandemics I think we have about two
minutes to a hard break here in in 1929
the stock market crash in and of itself
didn't cause the Depression correct me
if I'm wrong but rather everybody was in
debt there were all these people who
owned stocked on margin and as the stock
market went down those margin calls got
hit and people had you know they had to
pay back the debts and they couldn't do
it and that's really what crashed the
system we have massive debt in the
United States right now that bubble has
not yet started a burst has it and you
expect it to yes I mean it we are much
more indebted than we were in 1929 that
but the irony there Tom I have to get
this out the irony is we the reason
corporations have greater debt now than
at any time in American history is that
we solved the crash the dot-com crash in
2000 and then the the subprime mortgage
question 289 by lowering interest rates
making it an invitation with all that
money and the low interest rates for
every corporation no matter what the
problem it had in its business to solve
it by getting essentially free money and
going into levels of debt that are now
about burst because the underlying
economy cannot generate the profits out
of which that debt was supposed to be
repaid and the government acts as though
this catastrophe is somehow not going to
happen that's a mistake and it makes are
you expecting a large defaults on
corporate bonds now well I think what
the government is going to do is
basically either allow that to happen
which would be catastrophic
or simply suspend all the repayment of
credit and have the gap the government
finally stepped in and say what has
already been the truth we are now the
economy the government guarantees
everything private capitalism
has collapsed and we'll figure out what
we do from here